# Concepts

There are three relevant concepts for the configuration that are provided by
Novella itself:

1. {@link docs:novella:concepts:options}
2. {@link docs:novella:concepts:actions}
3. {@link docs:novella:concepts:templates}


@anchor docs:novella:concepts:options
## Options

An option is defined using the `NovellaContext.option()` function and allows you to define a command-line option that
is parsed by Novella when running your build script.

```py
option
  "site_directory" "d"
  description: "The directory in which to generate the final HTML."
  default: "_site"
```

@anchor docs:novella:concepts:actions
## Actions

Actions are plugins that execute some logic when its their turn and are declared using the `NovellaContext.do()`
function. Inside the configuration closure of actions, the `NovellaContext.options` dictionary can be used to
read option values that have been passed via the CLI.

```py
do "copy-files" {
  paths = [ "content", "mkdocs.yml" ]
}
```

Actions may be named to later retrieve and further configure them using `NovellaContext.action()`, or to use them
as reference point for adding other actions before or after. It is common for templates to create named blank actions,
allowing a user after the template was applied to inject actions into the sequence generated by the template.

```py
template "mkdocs"

action "preprocess-markdown" {
  # ...
}
```

!!! note

    New actions can be implemented using the `novella.action.Action` base class and registering the subclass under
    the `novella.actions` entrypoint.

@anchor docs:novella:concepts:templates
## Templates

A template is a plugin that takes over definition of the Novella pipeline to avoid some boilerplate in your
configuration script. Templates are invoked via the `NovellaContext.template()` function and can also be
configured using "init" and "post" closures (before the template is executed and after, respectively). Novella
itself delivers an `mkdocs` template out of the box.

```py
template "mkdocs" {
  configure update_config {
    apply_defaults = False
  }
}
```

!!! note

    New templates can be implemented using the `novella.template.Template` base class and registering the subclass
    under the `novella.templates` entrypoint.
